My oldest child is diagnosed autistic, I am late-identified autistic, and my youngest is coded for social communication challenges at school. I’m four years into advocating for my kids at school and one year into my own self-actualization journey, and I’ve learned that even when you are living an autistic experience, it is impossible to perfectly understand, or hold perfect empathy, for someone else’s. Nevertheless, the key not only to autism awareness, but acceptance, is to endeavor to try to understand as best we can.
Empathy isn’t a mindset or characteristic, it’s an exercise in actively seeking to understand other people’s experiences. Below are tips for people who work with, live with, teach, care for, or love someone with autism who’d like to grow empathy for them.
Take it one person at a time
The autism advocacy community loves the Dr. Stephen Shore quote, “If you’ve met one individual with autism, you’ve met one individual with autism,” as a way to describe the diversity of experiences around the autism spectrum. That’s because, while there are common characteristics, including traits you’d mostly likely be able to spot in a room full of autistic people, growing empathy for the autistic experience is best done one person at a time.
This doesn’t mean going from autistic person to autistic person and asking them to educate you about the state of autism today, but instead to notice with an open heart and an open mind how they are responding to the world around them, including you, without any expectation of what’s right, wrong, or normal.
The spectrum part of “autism spectrum” isn’t referring to a severity scale, low to high, it’s referring to an array, an assortment of traits experienced in different degrees by each individual. Autism also has a lot of co-morbidities relating to physical health and learning capabilities, which co-exist on their own spectrums, so the possible combinations of traits making up each person’s experience is vast.
Social media has its issues, but one very easy way to gain understanding of individual autistic experiences is to spend some of your social media time listening to autistic creators. Hashtags like #actuallyautistic and #autisticadult will steer you toward people with firsthand experience being autistic who are sharing their stories to form connections and grow understanding. The key word here is listen.

